Barkloughly Castle call theythis at hand?
Yea, my lord.
How brooks Your Grace theair
after your late tossing onthe breaking seas?
Needs must I like it well.
I weep for joy to standupon my kingdom once again.
Dear earth,
I do salute thee with myhands,
though rebels wound theewith their horses' hoofs.
As a long-parted motherwith her child
plays fondly with her tearsand smiles in meeting,
so weeping, smiling, greetI thee, my earth,
and do thee favors with myroyal hands.
Feed not thy sovereign'sfoe, my gentle earth,
nor with thy sweets comforthis ravenous sense,
but let thy spiders thatsuck up thy venom
and heavy-gaited toads liein their way,
doing annoyance to thetreacherous feet
which with usurping stepsdo trample thee.
Yield stinging nettles tomine enemies.
And when they from thybosom pluck a flower,
guard it, I pray thee,with a lurking adder
whose double-tongue maywith a mortal touch
throw death upon thysovereign's enemies.
Mock not my senselessconjuration, lords.
This earth shall have afeeling
and these stones provearmed soldiers
ere her native king shallfalter under foulrebellion's arms.
Fear not, my lord.
That power that made youking
hath power to keep youking in spite of all.
The means that heavenyields must be embraced
and not neglected,
else, if heaven would, andwe will not,
heaven's offer we refuse,
the proffered means ofsuccor and redress.
He means, my lord, that weare too remiss
whilst Bolingbroke,through our security,
grows strong and great insubstance and in power.
Discomfortable cousin.
Know'st thou not that whenthe searching eye of heaven
is hid behind the globe andlights the lower world,
then thieves and robbersrange abroad unseen
in murders and in outrage,boldly here.
But when from under thisterrestrial ball
he fires the proud tops ofthe eastern pines
and darts his lightthrough every guilty hole,
then murders, treasons,and detested sins,
the cloak of night beingplucked from off their backs,
stand bare and naked,trembling at themselves?
So when this thief, thistraitor, Bolingbroke,
who all this while hathreveled in the night
whilst we were wanderingwith the antipodes,
shall see us rising in ourthrone, the east.
His treasons will sitblushing on his face,
not able to endure thesight of day,
but self-affrightedtremble at his sin.
Not all the water in therough, rude sea
can wash the balm off froman anointed king.
The breath of worldly mencannot depose
the deputy elected by theLord.
For every man thatBolingbroke hath pressed
to lift shrewd steelagainst our golden crown,
God for his Richard hathin heavenly pay a gloriousangel.
Then, if angels fight,
weak men must fall,
for heaven still guardsthe right.
Welcome, my lord.
How far off lies yourpower?
Nor near nor farther off,my gracious lord,
than this weak arm.
Discomfort guides mytongue
and bids me speak ofnothing but despair.
One day too late, I fearme, gracious Lord,
hath clouded all thy happydays on earth.
Oh, call back yesterday.
Bid time return,
and thou shalt have 12,000fighting men.
Today, today-- unhappyday, too late--
o'erthrows thy joys, friends,fortune, and thy state.
For all the Welshmen,hearing thou wert dead,
are gone to Bolingbroke,dispersed and fled.
Comfort, my liege.
Why looks Your Grace sopale?
But now the blood of 20,000men did triumph in my face,
and they are fled.
And till so much bloodthither come again,
Have I not reason to lookpale and dead?
All souls that will besafe fly from my side,
for time hath set a blotupon my pride.
Comfort, my liege.
Remember who you are.
I had forgot myself.
Am I not king?
Awake, thou cowardmajesty.
Thou sleepest.
Is not the king's name20,000 names?
Arm, arm, my name.
A puny subject strikes atthy great glory.
Look not to the ground, yefavorites of a king.
Are we not high?
High be our thoughts.
I know my uncle York hathpower enough to serve ourturn.
But who comes here?
More health and happinessbetide my liege
than can my care-tunedtongue deliver him.
Mine ear is open and myheart prepared.
The worst is worldly lossthou canst unfold.
Say, is my kingdom lost?
Why, 'twas my care.
And what loss is it to berid of care?
Strives Bolingbroke to beas great as we?
Greater he shall not be.
If he serve God,
we'll serve Him, too, andbe His fellow so.
Revolt our subjects?
That we cannot mend.
They break their faith toGod as well as us.
Cry woe, destruction,ruin, and decay.
The worst is death, anddeath will have his day.
Glad am I that YourHighness
is so armed to bear thetidings of calamity.
Like an unseasonablestormy day
which makes the silverrivers drown their shores,
as if the world were alldissolved to tears,
so high above his limitsswells the rage ofBolingbroke,
covering your fearful land
with hard, bright steel andhearts harder than steel.
Whitebeards have armed theirthin and hairless scalps
against thy majesty.
Boys with women's voicesstrive to speak big
and clap their femalejoints
in stiff, unwieldy armsagainst thy crown.
Thy very beadsmen learn tobend their bows
of double-fatal yewagainst thy state.
Yea, distaff women managerusty bills against thy seat.
Both young and old rebel,
and all goes worse than Ihave power to tell.
Too well, too well thoutell'st a tale so ill.
Where is the earl ofWiltshire?
Where is Bagot?
What is become of Bushy?
Where is Green,
that they have let thedangerous enemy
measure our confines withsuch peaceful steps?
If we prevail, their headsshall pay for it.
I warrant they have madepeace with Bolingbroke.
Peace have they made withhim indeed, my lord.
Oh, villains!
Vipers damned withoutredemption!
Dogs easily won to fawn onany man.
Snakes, in my heart bloodwarmed, that sting my heart.
Three Judases, each onethrice worse than Judas.
Would they make peace?
Terrible hell make war
upon their spotted soulsfor this offence.
Sweet love, I see changinghis property
turns to the sourest andmost deadly hate.
Again uncurse their souls.
Their peace is made withheads and not with hands.
Those whom you curse
have felt the worst ofdeath's destroying wound
and lie full low, gravedin the hollow ground.
Is Bushy, Green, and theearl of Wiltshire dead?
Aye, all of them atBristol lost their heads.
Where is the duke, myfather, with his power?
No matter where.
Of comfort no man speak.
Let's talk of graves, ofworms, and epitaphs.
Make dust our paper,
and with rainy eyes writesorrow on the bosom ofthe earth.
Let's choose executors andtalk of wills.
And yet not so,
for what can we bequeath,
save our deposed bodies tothe ground?
Our lands, our lives, andall are Bolingbroke's,
and nothing can we callour own but death
and that small model ofthe barren earth
which serves as paste andcover to our bones.
For God's sake, let us situpon the ground
and tell sad stories ofthe death of kings:
how some have beendeposed,
some slain in war,
some haunted by the ghoststhey have deposed,
some poisoned by theirwives,
some sleeping killed.
All murdered.
For within the hollowcrown
that rounds the mortaltemples of a king
keeps death his court.
And there the antic sits,
scoffing his state andgrinning at his pomp,
allowing him a breath,
a little scene tomonarchize, be feared, andkill with looks,
infusing him with self andvain conceit,
as if this flesh whichwalls about our life
were brass impregnable,
and humored thus, comes atthe last,
and with a little pinbores through his castlewall,
and farewell king.
Cover your heads
and mock not flesh and bloodwith solemn reverence.
Throw away respect,tradition, form, andceremonious duty,
for you have but mistookme all this while.
I live with bread likeyou,
feel want,
taste grief,
need friends.
Subjected thus,
how can you say to me, Iam a king?
My lord, wise men ne'ersit and wail their woes,
but presently prevent theways to wail.
To fear the foe, sincefear oppresseth strength,
gives in your weaknessstrength unto your foe,
and so your follies fightagainst yourself.
Fear and be slain.
No worse can come tofight.
And fight and die is deathdestroying death,
where fearing dying paysdeath servile breath.
My father hath a power.
Inquire of him and learnto make a body of a limb.
Thou chidest me well.
Proud Bolingbroke,
I come to change blows withthee for our day of doom.
This ague fit of fear isoverblown.
An easy task it is to winour own.
Say, Scroop, where liesour uncle with his power?
Speak sweetly, man,
although thy looks besour.
Men judge by thecomplexion of the sky
the state and inclinationof the day,
and so may you by my dulland heavy eye.
My tongue hath but aheavier tale to say.
I play the torturer,
by small and small
to lengthen out the worstthat must be spoken.
Your uncle York is joinedwith Bolingbroke--
and all your northerncastles yielded up,
and all your southerngentlemen in arms upon hisparty.
Thou hast said enough.
Beshrew thee, cousin,which didst lead me forth
of that sweet way I was into despair.
What say you now?
What comfort have we now?
By heaven, I'll hate himeverlastingly
that bids me be of comfortanymore.
Go to Flint Castle.
There I'll pine away.
A king, woe's slave, shallkingly woe obey.
That power I have,discharge,
and let them go to ear theland that hath some hopeto grow,
for I have none.
Let no man speak again toalter this,
for counsel is but vain.
My liege, one word--
He does me double wrong
that wounds me with theflatteries of his tongue.
Discharge my followers!
Let them hence away
from Richard's night toBolingbroke's fair day.
intelligence
we learn the Welshmen aredispersed
and Salisbury is gone tomeet the king,
who lately landed withsome few private friendsupon this coast.
The news is very fair andgood, my lord.
Richard not far from hencehath hid his head.
It would beseem the lordNorthumberland
to say "King Richard."
Alack the heavy day
when such a sacred kingshould hide his head.
Your Grace mistakes.
Only to be brief left Ihis title out.
The time hath been,
would you have been sobrief with him,
he would have been so briefwith you, to shorten you,
for taking so the head,your whole head's length.
Mistake not, Uncle,further than you should--
Take not, good cousin,further than you should,
lest you mistake theheavens are o'er ourheads.
I know it, Uncle, andoppose not myself againsttheir will.
But who comes here?
Welcome, Harry.
What, will not this castleyield?
The castle royally ismanned, my lord, againstthy entrance.
Royally?
Why, it contains no king?
Yes, my good lord, it dothcontain a king.
King Richard lies within thelimits of yon lime and stone,
and with him are the lordAumerle,
Lord Salisbury, SirStephen Scroop,
besides a clergyman ofholy reverence--
who, I cannot learn.
Oh, belike it is thebishop of Carlisle.
Noble lord, go to the ruderibs of that ancient castle.
Through brazen trumpetsend the breath of parle
into his ruined ears, andthus deliver:
Henry Bolingbroke, on bothhis knees,
doth kiss King Richard'shand
and sends allegiance andtrue faith of heart
to his most royal person,
hither come even at his feetto lay my arms and power,
provided that mybanishment repealed
and lands restored againbe freely granted.
If not, I'll use theadvantage of my power
and lay the summer's dustwith showers of blood
rained from the wounds ofslaughtered Englishmen.
The which, how far offfrom the mind ofBolingbroke it is,
such crimson tempestshould bedrench
the fresh green lap offair King Richard's land,
my stooping duty tenderlyshall show.
Go.
Signify as much,
while here we march upon thegrassy carpet of this plain.
Let's march without thenoise of threatening drum,
that from this castle'stattered battlements
our fair appointments maybe well perused.
Methinks King Richard andmyself should meet
with no less terror
than the elements of fireand water,
when their thunderingshock at meeting
tears the cloudy cheeks ofheaven.
Be he the fire.
I'll be the yieldingwater.
The rage be his,
whilst on the earth I rainmy waters--
on the earth, and not onhim.
March on,
and mark King Richard howhe looks.
See; see.
King Richard doth himselfappear,
as doth the blushing,discontented sun
from out the fiery portalof the east,
when he perceives theenvious clouds are bent
to dim his glory and tostain the track
of his bright passage tothe occident.
Yet looks he like a king.
Behold his eye, as brightas is the eagle's,
lightens forth controllingmajesty.
Alack, alack, for woe,
that any harm should stainso fair a show.
We are amazed
and thus long have westood
to watch the fearfulbending of thy knee,
because we thought ourselfthy lawful king.
And if we be,
how dare thy joints forget
to pay their awful duty toour presence?
If we be not, show us thehand of God
that hath dismissed usfrom our stewardship,
for well we know, no handof blood and bone
can gripe the sacredhandle of our scepter
unless he do profane,steal, or usurp.
And though you think thatall, as you have done,
have torn their souls byturning them from us,
and we are barren andbereft of friends,
yet know, my master, Godomnipotent,
is mustering in hisclouds, on our behalf,
armies of pestilence,
and they shall strike yourchildren yet unborn andunbegot
that lift your vassalhands against my head
and threat the glory of myprecious crown.
Tell Bolingbroke-- foryond methinks he stands--
that every stride he makesupon my land is dangeroustreason.
He is come to open thepurple testament ofbleeding war.
But ere the crown he looksfor live in peace,
10,000 bloody crowns ofmothers' sons
shall ill become theflower of England's face,
change the complexion ofher maid-pale peace
to scarlet indignation
and bedew her pastures'grass with faithfulEnglish blood.
The king of heaven forbidour lord the king
should so with civil anduncivil arms be rushed upon.
Thy thrice noble cousin,Harry Bolingbroke,
doth humbly kiss thy hand.
And by the honorable tombhe swears,
that stands upon yourroyal grandsire's bones,
and by the royalties ofboth your bloods,
currents that spring fromone most gracious head,
and by the buried hand ofwarlike Gaunt,
and by the worth and honorof himself,
comprising all that may besworn or said,
his coming hither hath nofurther scope
than for his linealroyalties
and to beg enfranchisementimmediate on his knees,
which on thy royal partygranted once,
his glittering arms hewill commend to rust,
his barbed steeds tostables,
and his heart to faithfulservice of Your Majesty.
This swears he, as he is aprince, is just.
And, as I am a gentleman,I credit him.
Northumberland, say thusthe king returns:
his noble cousin is rightwelcome hither
and all the number of hisfair demands
shall be accomplishedwithout contradiction.
With all the graciousutterance that thou hast,
speak to his gentlehearing kind commends.
We do debase ourselves,cousin, do we not,
to look so poorly and tospeak so fair?
Shall we call backNorthumberland
and send defiance to thetraitor, and so die?
No, good my lord.
Let's fight with gentlewords
till time lend friends andfriends their helpful swords.
Oh, God.
Oh, God, that e'er thistongue of mine
that laid the sentence ofdread banishment on yonproud man
should take it off againwith words of sooth.
Oh, that I were as greatas is my grief
or lesser than my name,
or that I could forgetwhat I have been
or not remember what Imust be now.
Swell'st thou, proudheart?
I'll give thee scope tobeat,
since foes have scope tobeat both thee and me.
Northumberland comes backfrom Bolingbroke.
What must the king do now?
Must he submit?
The king shall do it.
Must he be deposed?
The king shall becontented.
Must he lose the name ofking?
O' God's name, let it go.
I'll give my jewels for aset of beads,
my gorgeous palace for ahermitage,
my gay apparel for analmsman's gown,
my figured goblets for adish of wood,
my scepter for a palmer'swalking staff,
my subjects for a pair ofcarved saints,
and my large kingdom for alittle grave--
a little, little grave.
An obscure grave.
Or I'll be buried in theking's highway,
some way of common trade,
where subjects' feet
may hourly trample ontheir sovereign's head;
for on my heart they treadnow whilst I live,
and buried once, why notupon my head?
Aumerle, thou weep'st.
My tenderhearted cousin,
we'll make foul weatherwith despised tears.
Our sighs and they shalllodge the summer corn
and make a dearth in thisrevolting land.
Or shall we play thewantons with our woes
and make some pretty matchwith shedding tears,
as thus to drop them stillupon one place
till they have fretted usa pair of graves withinthe earth
and, therein laid--
there lies two kinsmen.
Dig their graves withweeping eyes.
Would not this ill dowell?
Well,
well, I see I talk butidly, and you laugh at me.
Most mighty prince, mylord Northumberland,
what says KingBolingbroke?
Will His Majesty giveRichard leave to live tillRichard die?
You make a leg, andBolingbroke says aye.
My lord, he doth attend inthe base court to speakwith you.
May it please you tocome down.
Down.
Down I come,
like glistering Phaethon
wanting the manage ofunruly jades.
In the base court?
Base court, where kingsgrow base,
to come at traitors' callsand do them grace.
In the base court?
Come down?
Down, court;
down, king;
for night owls shriekwhere mounting larksshould sing.
What says His Majesty?
Sorrow and grief of heartmake him speak fondly,
like a frantic man yet heis come.
Stand all apart and showfair duty to His Majesty.
My gracious lord.
Fair cousin, you debaseyour princely knee
to make the base earthproud with kissing it.
Me rather had my heartmight feel your love
than my unpleased eye seeyour courtesy.
Up, cousin, up.
Your heart is up, I know,thus high at least,
although your knee be low.
My gracious lord, I comebut for mine own.
Your own is yours, and Iam yours, and all.
So far be mine, my mostredoubted lord,
as my true service shalldeserve your love.
Well you deserve.
They well deserve to have
that know the strongestand surest way to get.
Uncle, give me your hands.
Nay, dry your eyes.
Tears show their loves,but want their remedies.
Cousin, I am too young tobe your father,
though you are old enoughto be my heir.
What you will have, I'llgive, and willing too,
for do we must what forcewill have us do.
Set on towards London,cousin, is it so?
Yea, my good lord.
Then I must not say no.
What sport shall we devisehere in this garden,
to drive away the heavythought of care?
Madam, we'll play atbowls.
'Twill make me think theworld is full of rubs,
and that my fortune runsagainst the bias.
Madam, we'll dance.
My legs can keep nomeasure in delight
when my poor heart nomeasure keeps in grief.
Therefore, no dancing,girl.
Some other sport.
Madam, we'll tell tales.
Of sorrow or of joy?
Of either, madam.
Of neither, girl.
For if of joy, beingaltogether wanting,
it doth remember me themore of sorrow;
or if of grief, beingaltogether had,
it adds more sorrow to mywant of joy.
For what I have I need notto repeat,
and what I want it bootsnot to complain.
Madam, I'll sing.
'Tis well that thouhast cause,
but thou shouldst please mebetter wouldst thou weep.
I could weep, madam, wouldit do you good.
And I could sing, wouldweeping do me good,
and never borrow any tearof thee.
Here come the gardeners.
Let's step into the shadowof these trees.
My wretchedness unto a rowof pins
they'll talk of state,
for everyone doth soagainst a change.
Woe is forerun with woe.
Go, bind thou up yondangling apricocks,
which, like unruly children,
make their sire stoop withoppression
of their prodigal weight.
Give some supportance tothe bending twigs.
Go thou and, like anexecutioner,
cut off the heads of toofast growing sprays
that look too lofty in ourcommonwealth.
All must be even in ourgovernment.
You thus employed,
I will go root away thenoisome weeds,
which without profit suckthe soil's fertility
from the wholesomeflowers.
Why should we, in thecompass of a pale,
keep law and form and dueproportion,
showing, as in a model,our firm estate,
when our sea-walledgarden, the whole land,
is full of weeds,
her fairest flowers chokedup,
her fruit trees allunpruned,
her hedges ruined, herknots disordered,
and her wholesome herbsswarming withcaterpillars?
Hold thy peace.
He who that hath sufferedthis disordered spring
hath now himself met withthe fall of leaf.
The weeds which his broad,spreading leaves did shelter,
that seemed in eating himto hold him up,
are plucked up root andall by Bolingbroke--
I mean the earl ofWiltshire, Bushy, Green.
What, are they dead?
They are, and Bolingbroke hathseized the wasteful king.
Oh, I am pressed to deaththrough want of speaking.
Thou, old Adam's likeness,
set to dress this garden,
how dares thy harsh rudetongue sound thisunpleasing news?
What Eve, what serpent,hath suggested thee
to make a second fall ofcursed man?
Why dost thou say KingRichard is deposed?
Darest thou,
thou little better thingthan earth,
divine his downfall?
Say, where, when, andhow camest thou by thisill tidings?
Speak, thou wretch.
Pardon me, madam.
Little joy have I tobreathe this news.
Yet what I say is true.
King Richard, he is in themighty hold of Bolingbroke.
Their fortunes both areweighed.
In your lord's scale isnothing but himself
and some few vanities thatmake him light.
But in the balance ofgreat Bolingbroke,
besides himself, are allthe English peers.
And with that odds heweighs King Richard down.
Post you to London, andyou will find it so.
I speak no more thaneveryone doth know.
Nimble mischance, that artso light of foot,
does not thy embassagebelong to me,
and am I the last thatknows it?
Oh, thou think'st to serveme last
that I may longest keepthy sorrow in my breast.
Come, ladies, go,
to meet at London London'sking in woe.
What, was I born to this,
that my sad look
should grace the triumphof great Bolingbroke?
Gardener, for telling methis news of woe,
pray God the plants thougraft'st may never grow.